# Monolithic architecture

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/monolithic.html

Pattern: Monolithic Architecture 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Monolithic Architecture 
 pattern
 application architecture
 Context 
 You are developing a business-critical enterprise application.
You need to deliver changes rapidly, frequently and reliably - as measured by the DORA metrics - in order for your business to thrive in today’s volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous world.
Consequently, your engineering organization is organized into small, loosely coupled, cross-functional teams as described by Team Topologies .
Each team delivers software using DevOps practices as defined by the DevOps handbook .
In particular, it practices continuous deployment.
The team delivers a stream of small, frequent changes that are tested by an automated deployment pipeline and deployed into production. 
 A team is responsible for one or more subdomains.
A subdomain is an implementable model of a slice of business functionality, a.k.a. business capability.
It consists of business logic, which consists of business entities (a.k.a. DDD aggregates) that implement business rules, and adapters, which communicate with the outside world.
A Java-based subdomain, for example, consists of classes organized into packages that’s compiled into a JAR file. 
 The subdomains implement the application’s behavior, which consists of a set of (system) operations.
An operation is invoked in one of three ways: synchronous and asynchronous requests from clients; events published by other applications and services; and the passing of time.
It mutates and queries business entities in one or more subdomains. 
 Problem 
 How to organize the subdomains into one or more deployable/executable components? 
 Forces 
 There are five dark energy forces : 
 Simple components - simple components consisting of few subdomains are easier to understand and maintain than complex components 
 Team autonomy - a team needs to be able to develop, test and deploy their software independently of other teams 
 Fast deployment pipeline - fast feedback and high deployment frequency are essential and are enabled by a fast deployment pipeline, which in turn requires components that are fast to build and test. 
 Support multiple technology stacks - subdomains are sometimes implemented using a variety of technologies; and developers need to evolve the application’s technology stack, e.g. use current versions of languages and frameworks 
 Segregate by characteristics - e.g. resource requirements to improve scalability, their availability requirements to improve availability, their security requirements to improve security, etc. 
 There are five dark matter forces : 
 Simple interactions - an operation that’s local to a component or consists of a few simple interactions between components is easier to understand and troubleshoot than a distributed operation, especially one consisting of complex interactions 
 Efficient interactions - a distributed operation that involves lots of network round trips and large data transfers can be too inefficient 
 Prefer ACID over BASE - it’s easier to implement an operation as an ACID transaction rather than, for example, eventually consistent sagas 
 Minimize runtime coupling - to maximize the availability and reduce the latency of an operation 
 Minimize design time coupling - reduce the likelihood of changing services in lockstep, which reduces productivity 
 Solution 
 Design an architecture that structures the application as a single deployable/executable component that uses a single database.
The component contains all of the application’s subdomains.
Since there’s a single component, all operations are local. 
 Example 
 Let’s imagine that you are building an e-commerce application that takes orders from customers, verifies inventory and available credit, and ships them.
The application consists of several components including the StoreFrontUI, which implements the user interface, along with some backend services for checking credit,
maintaining inventory and shipping orders. 
 The application is deployed as a single monolithic application.
For example, a Java web application consists of a single WAR file that runs on a web container such as Tomcat.
A Rails application consists of a single directory hierarchy deployed using either, for example, Phusion Passenger on Apache/Nginx or JRuby on Tomcat.
You can run multiple instances of the application behind a load balancer in order to scale and improve availability. 
 Resulting context 
 Benefits 
 Since the application consists of a single component and all operations are local this solution has a number of benefits.
Specifically, the dark energy forces are resolved as follows: 
 Simple interactions - all interactions are generally easier to understand and troubleshoot. However, interactions between subdomains could potentially be complex. 
 Efficient interactions - interactions are typically more efficient since all communication is local. 
 Prefer ACID over Base - operations can be implemented as ACID transactions (usually) 
 Minimize runtime coupling - there’s no runtime coupling between components 
 Minimize design time coupling - these’s no design time coupling between components. There can, however, be design time coupling between subdomains within the monolith. 
 Drawbacks 
 This solution has a number of ( potential ) drawbacks.
Specifically, an architecture might fail to resolve the dark energy forces: 
 Simple components - since there’s only a single component it is potentially difficult to understand and maintain due its size and complexity 
 Team autonomy - there’s potentially less team autonomy since all teams are contributing to the same code base and they need to coordinate their work more often 
 Fast deployment pipeline - the deployment pipeline is potentially slow since there’s a single large application that needs to be built and tested 
 Multiple technology stacks - the application uses a single technology stack, which might not be ideal for all subdomains. Also, if the application is large upgrading the technology stack might be very time consuming 
 Segregate by characteristics - there’s no possibility of segregating subdomains by their characteristics, which might reduce scalability, availability, security etc 
 These drawbacks become more severe as the application grows in size and complexity and the number of teams developing it increases. 
 Issues 
 A key challenge with the monolithic architecture is minimizing the potential drawbacks, especially as the application grows in size and complexity and the number of teams developing it increases.
There are a few solutions that can reduce some of the drawbacks: 
 Increase maintainability and team autonomy by modularizing the monolith . Instead of the traditional layered architecture, the subdomains are organized into vertical slices consisting of presentation, business and persistent logic. 
 Accelerate the deployment pipeline by 
 apply physical design principles to the modular monolith in order to reduce build time coupling 
 implementing an automated merge queue 
 using a build tool that supports incremental building and testing 
 parallelizing and clustering the build and test steps. 
 Related patterns 
 The microservice architecture is an alternative pattern that addresses the limitations of the monolithic architecture. 
 Known uses 
 Well known internet services such as Netflix, Amazon.com and eBay initially had a monolithic architecture.
Most web applications developed by the author prior to 2012 had a monolithic architecture. 
 pattern
 application architecture
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
