# Decompose by business capability

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/decomposition/decompose-by-business-capability.html

Pattern: Decompose by business capability 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Decompose by business capability 
 pattern
 Context 
 You are developing a large, complex application and want to use the microservice architecture .
The microservice architecture structures an application as a set of loosely coupled services.
The goal of the microservice architecture is to accelerate software development by enabling continuous delivery/deployment. 
 The microservice architecture does this in two ways: 
 Simplifies testing and enables components to deployed independently 
 Structures the engineering organization as a collection of small (6-10 members), autonomous teams, each of which is responsible for one or more services 
 These benefits are not automatically guaranteed.
Instead, they can only be achieved by the careful functional decomposition of the application into services. 
 A service must be small enough to be developed by a small team and to be easily tested.
A useful guideline from object-oriented design (OOD) is the Single Responsibility Principle ( SRP ).
The SRP defines a responsibility of a class as a reason to change, and states that a class should only have one reason to change.
It make sense to apply the SRP to service design as well and design services that are cohesive and implement a small set of strongly related functions. 
 The application also be decomposed in a way so that most new and changed requirements only affect a single service.
That is because changes that affect multiple services requires coordination across multiple teams, which slows down development.
Another useful principle from OOD is the Common Closure Principle (CCP), which states that classes that change for the same reason should be in the same package.
Perhaps, for instance, two classes implement different aspects of the same business rule.
The goal is that when that business rule changes developers, only need to change code in a small number - ideally only one - of packages.
This kind of thinking makes sense when designing services since it will help ensure that each change should impact only one service. 
 Problem 
 How to decompose an application into services? 
 Forces 
 The architecture must be stable 
 Services must be cohesive.
A service should implement a small set of strongly related functions. 
 Services must conform to the Common Closure Principle - things that change together should be packaged together - to ensure that each change affect only one service 
 Services must be loosely coupled - each service as an API that encapsulates its implementation.
The implementation can be changed without affecting clients 
 A service should be testable 
 Each service be small enough to be developed by a “two pizza” team, i.e. a team of 6-10 people 
 Each team that owns one or more services must be autonomous.
A team must be able to develop and deploy their services with minimal collaboration with other teams. 
 Solution 
 Define services corresponding to business capabilities.
A business capability is a concept from business architecture modeling.
It is something that a business does in order to generate value.
A business capability often corresponds to a business object, e.g. 
 Order Management is responsible for orders 
 Customer Management is responsible for customers 
 Business capabilities are often organized into a multi-level hierarchy.
For example, an enterprise application might have top-level categories such as Product/Service development , Product/Service delivery , Demand generation , etc. 
 Examples 
 The business capabilities of an online store include: 
 Product catalog management 
 Inventory management 
 Order management 
 Delivery management 
 … 
 The corresponding microservice architecture would have services corresponding to each of these capabilities. 
 Resulting Context 
 This pattern has the following benefits: 
 Stable architecture since the business capabilities are relatively stable 
 Development teams are cross-functional, autonomous, and organized around delivering business value rather than technical features 
 Services are cohesive and loosely coupled 
 Issues 
 There are the following issues to address: 
 How to identify business capabilities? 
Identifying business capabilities and hence services requires an understanding of the business.
An organization’s business capabilities are identified by analyzing the organization’s purpose, structure, business processes, and areas of expertise.
Bounded contexts are best identified using an iterative process.
Good starting points for identifying business capabilities are: 
 organization structure - different groups within an organization might correspond to business capabilities or business capability groups. 
 high-level domain model - business capabilities often correspond to domain objects 
 Related patterns 
 The Decompose by subdomain pattern is an alternative pattern 
 pattern
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
