# 3rd party registration

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/3rd-party-registration.html

Pattern: 3rd Party Registration 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: 3rd Party Registration 
 pattern
 inter-service communication
 service discovery
 Context 
 You have applied either the Client-side Service Discovery pattern or the Server-side Service Discovery pattern .
Service instances must be registered with the service registry on startup so that they can be discovered and unregistered on shutdown. 
 Problem 
 How are service instances registered with and unregistered from the service registry? 
 Forces 
 Service instances must be registered with the service registry on startup and unregistered on shutdown 
 Service instances that crash must be unregistered from the service registry 
 Service instances that are running but incapable of handling requests must be unregistered from the service registry 
 Solution 
 A 3rd party registrar is responsible for registering and unregistering a service instance with the service registry.
When the service instance starts up, the registrar registers the service instance with the service registry.
When the service instance shuts downs, the registrar unregisters the service instance from the service registry. 
 Examples 
 Examples of the 3rd Party Registration pattern include: 
 Netflix Prana - a “side car” application that runs along side a non-JVM application and registers the application with Eureka. 
 AWS Autoscaling Groups automatically (un)registers EC2 instances with Elastic Load Balancer 
 Joyent’s Container buddy runs in a Docker container as the parent process for the service and registers it with the registry 
 Registrator - registers and unregisters Docker containers with various service registries 
 Clustering frameworks such as Kubernetes and Marathon (un)register service instances with the built-in/implicit registry 
 Resulting context 
 The benefits of the 3rd Party Registration pattern include: 
 The service code is less complex than when using the Self Registration pattern since its not responsible for registering itself 
 The registrar can perform health checks on a service instance and register/unregister the instance based the health check 
 There are also some drawbacks: 
 The 3rd party registrar might only have superficial knowledge of the state of the service instance, e.g. RUNNING or NOT RUNNING and so might not know whether it can handle requests. However, as mentioned above some registrars such as Netflix Prana perform a health check in order to determine the availability of the service instance. 
 Unless the registrar is part of the infrastructure it’s another component that must be installed, configured and maintained.
Also, since it’s a critical system component it needs to be highly available. 
 Related patterns 
 Service Registry 
 Client Side Discovery 
 Server Side Discovery 
 Self Registration is an alternative solution 
 pattern
 inter-service communication
 service discovery
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
