# Self-registration

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/self-registration.html

Pattern: Self Registration 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Self Registration 
 pattern
 inter-service communication
 service discovery
 Context 
 You have applied either the Client-side Service Discovery pattern or the Server-side Service Discovery pattern .
Service instances must be registered with the service registry on startup so that they can be discovered and unregistered on shutdown. 
 Problem 
 How are service instances registered with and unregistered from the service registry? 
 Forces 
 Service instances must be registered with the service registry on startup and unregistered on shutdown 
 Service instances that crash must be unregistered from the service registry 
 Service instances that are running but incapable of handling requests must be unregistered from the service registry 
 Solution 
 A service instance is responsible for registering itself with the service registry.
On startup the service instance registers itself (host and IP address) with the service registry and makes itself available for discovery.
The client must typically periodically renew its registration so that the registry knows it is still alive.
On shutdown, the service instance unregisters itself from the service registry. 
 This is typically handled by a Microservice chassis framework 
 Examples 
 The Microservices Example application is an example of an application that uses self-registration.
It is written in Scala and uses Spring Boot and Spring Cloud as the Microservice chassis .
The application uses the Eureka Service Registry , which is a Netflix OSS component. 
 Service registration is configured using the @EnableEurekaClient on a Java config class: 
 @Configuration 
 @EnableEurekaClient 
 class EurekaClientConfiguration { 
 This annotation causes the service instance to be registered with Eureka. 
 Resulting context 
 The benefits of the Self Registration pattern include the following: 
 A service instance knows its own state so can implement a state model that’s more complex than UP/DOWN, e.g. STARTING, AVAILABLE, … 
 There are also some drawbacks: 
 Couples the service to the Service Registry 
 You must implement service registration logic in each programming language/framework that you use to write your services, e.g. NodeJS/JavaScript, Java/Scala, etc. 
 A service instance that is running yet unable to handle requests will often lack the self-awareness to unregister itself from the service registry 
 Related patterns 
 Service Registry - an essential part of service discovery 
 Client Side Discovery - one way that a service instance is discovered 
 Server Side Discovery - another way a service instance is discovered 
 Microservice chassis - self registration is the responsibility the microservice chassis framework 
 3rd Party Registration is an alternative solution 
 pattern
 inter-service communication
 service discovery
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
