# Transactional outbox

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/data/transactional-outbox.html

Pattern: Transactional outbox 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Transactional outbox 
 pattern
 transactional messaging
 service design
 inter-service communication
 Also known as 
 Application events 
 Context 
 A service command typically needs to create/update/delete aggregates in the database and send messages/events to a message broker.
For example, a service that participates in a saga needs to update business entities and send messages/events.
Similarly, a service that publishes a domain event must update an aggregate and publish an event. 
 The command must atomically update the database and send messages in order to avoid data inconsistencies and bugs.
However, it is not viable to use a traditional distributed transaction (2PC) that spans the database and the message broker
The database and/or the message broker might not support 2PC.
And even if they do, it’s often undesirable to couple the service to both the database and the message broker. 
 But without using 2PC, sending a message in the middle of a transaction is not reliable.
There’s no guarantee that the transaction will commit.
Similarly, if a service sends a message after committing the transaction there’s no guarantee that it won’t crash before sending the message. 
 In addition, messages must be sent to the message broker in the order they were sent by the service.
They must usually be delivered to each consumer in the same order although that’s outside the scope of this pattern.
For example, let’s suppose that an aggregate is updated by a series of transactions T1 , T2 , etc.
This transactions might be performed by the same service instance or by different service instances.
Each transaction publishes a corresponding event: T1 -> E1 , T2 -> E2 , etc.
Since T1 precedes T2 , event E1 must be published before E2 . 
 Problem 
 How to atomically update the database and send messages to a message broker? 
 Forces 
 2PC is not an option. The database and/or the message broker might not support 2PC. Also, it’s often undesirable to couple the service to both the database and the message broker. 
 If the database transaction commits then the messages must be sent. Conversely, if the database rolls back, the messages must not be sent 
 Messages must be sent to the message broker in the order they were sent by the service. This ordering must be preserved across multiple service instances that update the same aggregate. 
 Solution 
 The solution is for the service that sends the message to first store the message in the database as part of the transaction that updates the business entities.
A separate process then sends the messages to the message broker. 
 The participants in this pattern are: 
 Sender - the service that sends the message 
 Database - the database that stores the business entities and message outbox 
 Message outbox - if it’s a relational database, this is a table that stores the messages to be sent. Otherwise, if it’s a NoSQL database, the outbox is a property of each database record (e.g. document or item) 
 Message relay - sends the messages stored in the outbox to the message broker 
 Result context 
 This pattern has the following benefits: 
 2PC is not used 
 Messages are guaranteed to be sent if and only if the database transaction commits 
 Messages are sent to the message broker in the order they were sent by the application 
 This pattern has the following drawbacks: 
 Potentially error prone since the developer might forget to publish the message/event after updating the database. 
 This pattern also has the following issues: 
 The Message relay might publish a message more than once.
It might, for example, crash after publishing a message but before recording the fact that it has done so.
When it restarts, it will then publish the message again.
As a result, a message consumer must be idempotent, perhaps by tracking the IDs of the messages that it has already processed.
Fortunately, since message Consumers usually need to be idempotent (because a message broker can deliver messages more than once) this is typically not a problem. 
 Related patterns 
 The Saga and Domain event patterns create the need for this pattern. 
 The Event sourcing is an alternative solution 
 There are two patterns for implementing the Message relay:
 The Transaction log tailing pattern 
 The Polling publisher pattern 
 Learn more 
 My book Microservices patterns describes this pattern in a lot more detail. 
 The Eventuate Tram framework implements this pattern 
 pattern
 transactional messaging
 service design
 inter-service communication
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
