# Saga

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/data/saga.html

Pattern: Saga 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Saga 
 pattern
 transaction management
 sagas
 service collaboration
 implementing commands
 Want to learn more about this pattern? 
 Take a look at my self-paced, online bootcamp that teaches you how to use the Saga, API Composition, and CQRS patterns to design operations that span multiple services.
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025)
 Context 
 You have applied the Database per Service pattern.
Each service has its own database.
Some business transactions, however, span multiple service so you need a mechanism to implement transactions that span services.
For example, let’s imagine that you are building an e-commerce store where customers have a credit limit.
The application must ensure that a new order will not exceed the customer’s credit limit.
Since Orders and Customers are in different databases owned by different services the application cannot simply use a local ACID transaction. 
 Problem 
 How to implement transactions that span services? 
 Forces 
 2PC is not an option 
 Solution 
 Implement each business transaction that spans multiple services as a saga.
A saga is a sequence of local transactions.
Each local transaction updates the database and publishes a message or event to trigger the next local transaction in the saga.
If a local transaction fails because it violates a business rule then the saga executes a series of compensating transactions that undo the changes that were made by the preceding local transactions. 
 There are two ways of coordination sagas: 
 Choreography - each local transaction publishes domain events that trigger local transactions in other services 
 Orchestration - an orchestrator (object) tells the participants what local transactions to execute 
 Example: Choreography-based saga 
 An e-commerce application that uses this approach would create an order using a choreography-based saga that consists of the following steps: 
 The Order Service receives the POST /orders request and creates an Order in a PENDING state 
 It then emits an Order Created event 
 The Customer Service ’s event handler attempts to reserve credit 
 It then emits an event indicating the outcome 
 The OrderService ’s event handler either approves or rejects the Order 
 Take a tour of an example saga 
 Example: Orchestration-based saga 
 An e-commerce application that uses this approach would create an order using an orchestration-based saga that consists of the following steps: 
 The Order Service receives the POST /orders request and creates the Create Order saga orchestrator 
 The saga orchestrator creates an Order in the PENDING state 
 It then sends a Reserve Credit command to the Customer Service 
 The Customer Service attempts to reserve credit 
 It then sends back a reply message indicating the outcome 
 The saga orchestrator either approves or rejects the Order 
 Take a tour of an example saga 
 Resulting context 
 This pattern has the following benefits: 
 It enables an application to maintain data consistency across multiple services without using distributed transactions 
 This solution has the following drawbacks: 
 Lack of automatic rollback - a developer must design compensating transactions that explicitly undo changes made earlier in a saga rather than relying on the automatic rollback feature of ACID transactions 
 Lack of isolation (the “I” in ACID) - the lack of isolation means that there’s risk that the concurrent execution of multiple sagas and transactions can use data anomalies. consequently, a saga developer must typical use countermeasures, which are design techniques that implement isolation. Moreover, careful analysis is needed to select and correctly implement the countermeasures. See Chapter 4/section 4.3 of my book Microservices Patterns for more information. 
 There are also the following issues to address: 
 In order to be reliable, a service must atomically update its database and publish a message/event.
It cannot use the traditional mechanism of a distributed transaction that spans the database and the message broker.
Instead, it must use one of the patterns listed below. 
 A client that initiates the saga, which an asynchronous flow, using a synchronous request (e.g. HTTP POST /orders ) needs to be able to determine its outcome.
There are several options, each with different trade-offs: 
 The service sends back a response once the saga completes, e.g. once it receives an OrderApproved or OrderRejected event. 
 The service sends back a response (e.g. containing the orderID ) after initiating the saga and the client periodically polls (e.g. GET /orders/{orderID} ) to determine the outcome 
 The service sends back a response (e.g. containing the orderID ) after initiating the saga, and then sends an event (e.g. websocket, web hook, etc) to the client once the saga completes. 
 Related patterns 
 The Database per Service pattern creates the need for this pattern 
 The following patterns are ways to atomically update state and publish messages/events:
 Event sourcing 
 Transactional Outbox 
 A choreography-based saga can publish events using Aggregates and Domain Events 
 The Command-side replica is an alternative pattern, which can replace saga step that query data 
 Learn more 
 My book Microservices patterns describes this pattern in a lot more detail. The book’s example application implements orchestration-based sagas using the Eventuate Tram Sagas framework 
 Take a look at my self-paced, online bootcamp that teaches you how to use the Saga, API Composition, and CQRS patterns to design operations that span multiple services. 
 Read these articles about the Saga pattern 
 My presentations on sagas and asynchronous microservices. 
 Example code 
 The following examples implement the customers and orders example in different ways: 
 Choreography-based saga where the services publish domain events using the Eventuate Tram framework 
 Orchestration-based saga where the Order Service uses a saga orchestrator implemented using the Eventuate Tram Sagas framework 
 Choreography and event sourcing-based saga where the services publish domain events using the Eventuate event sourcing framework 
 pattern
 transaction management
 sagas
 service collaboration
 implementing commands
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
