# Transaction script

Source: Microservice Patterns (Manning 2018), book p.149

148
CHAPTER 5
Designing business logic in a microservice architecture
The business logic is typically the most complex part of the service. When develop-
ing business logic, you should consciously organize your business logic in the way
that’s most appropriate for your application. After all, I’m sure you’ve experienced
the frustration of having to maintain someone else’s badly structured code. Most
enterprise applications are written in an object-oriented language such as Java, so
they consist of classes and methods. But using an object-oriented language doesn’t
guarantee that the business logic has an object-oriented design. The key decision you
must make when developing business logic is whether to use an object-oriented
approach or a procedural approach. There are two main patterns for organizing
Outbound adapters
Inbound adapters
Order
Service requests
POST/orders
GET/order/Id
REST API
Order database
Order Service
business logic
Order
command
handlers
Order events
Domain event
publisher adapter
Database
adapter
Figure 5.1
The Order Service has a hexagonal architecture. It consists of the business logic 
and one or more adapters that interface with external applications and other services.
 


149
Business logic organization patterns
business logic: the procedural Transaction script pattern, and the object-oriented
Domain model pattern.
5.1.1
Designing business logic using the Transaction script pattern
Although I’m a strong advocate of the object-oriented approach, there are some situa-
tions where it is overkill, such as when you are developing simple business logic. In such
a situation, a better approach is to write procedural code and use what the book Patterns
of Enterprise Application Architecture by Martin Fowler (Addison-Wesley Professional, 2002)
calls the Transaction script pattern. Rather than doing any object-oriented design, you
write a method called a transaction script to handle each request from the presentation
tier. As figure 5.2 shows, an important characteristic of this approach is that the classes
that implement behavior are separate from those that store state.
When using the Transaction script pattern, the scripts are usually located in service
classes, which in this example is the OrderService class. A service class has one
method for each request/system operation. The method implements the business
logic for that request. It accesses the database using data access objects (DAOs), such
as the OrderDao. The data objects, which in this example is the Order class, are pure
data with little or no behavior.
This style of design is highly procedural and relies on few of the capabilities of object-
oriented programming (OOP) languages. This what you would create if you were writ-
ing the application in C or another non-OOP language. Nevertheless, you shouldn’t be
Pattern: Transaction script
Organize the business logic as a collection of procedural transaction scripts, one for
each type of request.
createOrder()
reviseOrder()
cancelOrder()
...
OrderService
Classes with
behavior
Classes
with state
save(Order)
ﬁndOrderById()
...
OrderDao
orderId
orderLineItems
...
Order
Figure 5.2
Organizing business logic 
as transaction scripts. In a typical 
transaction script–based design, one 
set of classes implements behavior 
and another set stores state. The 
transaction scripts are organized into 
classes that typically have no state. 
The scripts use data classes, which 
typically have no behavior.
