# CQRS

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/data/cqrs.html

Pattern: Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS) 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS) 
 pattern
 service collaboration
 implementing queries
 Want to learn more about this pattern? 
 Take a look at my self-paced, online bootcamp that teaches you how to use the Saga, API Composition, and CQRS patterns to design operations that span multiple services.
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025)
 Context 
 You have applied the Microservices architecture pattern and the Database per service pattern .
As a result, it is no longer straightforward to implement queries that join data from multiple services.
Also, if you have applied the Event sourcing pattern then the data is no longer easily queried. 
 Problem 
 How to implement a query that retrieves data from multiple services in a microservice architecture? 
 Solution 
 Define a view database, which is a read-only ‘replica’ that is designed specifically to support that query, or a group related queries.
The application keeps the database up to date by subscribing to Domain events published by the service that own the data.
The type of database and its schema are optimized for the query or queries.
It’s often a NoSQL database, such as a document database or a key-value store. 
 Examples 
 My book’s FTGO example application has the Order History Service , which implements this pattern. 
 There are several Eventuate-based example applications that illustrate how to use this pattern. 
 Resulting context 
 This pattern has the following benefits: 
 Supports multiple denormalized views that are scalable and performant 
 Improved separation of concerns = simpler command and query models 
 Necessary in an event sourced architecture 
 This pattern has the following drawbacks: 
 Increased complexity 
 Potential code duplication 
 Replication lag/eventually consistent views 
 Related patterns 
 The Database per Service pattern creates the need for this pattern 
 The API Composition pattern is an alternative solution 
 The Domain event pattern generates the events 
 CQRS is often used with Event sourcing 
 See also 
 Eventuate , which is a platform for developing transactional business applications. 
 Learn more 
 My book Microservices patterns describes this pattern in a lot more detail 
 Take a look at my self-paced, online bootcamp that teaches you how to use the Saga, API Composition, and CQRS patterns to design operations that span multiple services. 
 pattern
 service collaboration
 implementing queries
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
