# API gateway

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/apigateway.html

Pattern: API Gateway / Backends for Frontends 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 pattern
 application api
 inter-service communication
 application architecture
 Context 
 Let’s imagine you are building an online store that uses the Microservice architecture pattern and that you are implementing the product details page.
You need to develop multiple versions of the product details user interface: 
 HTML5/JavaScript-based UI for desktop and mobile browsers - HTML is generated by a server-side web application 
 Native Android and iPhone clients - these clients interact with the server via REST APIs 
 In addition, the online store must expose product details via a REST API for use by 3rd party applications. 
 A product details UI can display a lot of information about a product.
For example, the Amazon.com details page for POJOs in Action displays: 
 Basic information about the book such as title, author, price, etc. 
 Your purchase history for the book 
 Availability 
 Buying options 
 Other items that are frequently bought with this book 
 Other items bought by customers who bought this book 
 Customer reviews 
 Sellers ranking 
 … 
 Since the online store uses the Microservice architecture pattern the product details data is spread over multiple services. For example, 
 Product Info Service - basic information about the product such as title, author 
 Pricing Service - product price 
 Order service - purchase history for product 
 Inventory service - product availability 
 Review service - customer reviews
… 
 Consequently, the code that displays the product details needs to fetch information from all of these services. 
 Problem 
 How do the clients of a Microservices-based application access the individual services? 
 Forces 
 The granularity of APIs provided by microservices is often different than what a client needs. Microservices typically provide fine-grained APIs, which means that clients need to interact with multiple services. For example, as described above, a client needing the details for a product needs to fetch data from numerous services. 
 Different clients need different data. For example, the desktop browser version of a product details page desktop is typically more elaborate then the mobile version. 
 Network performance is different for different types of clients. For example, a mobile network is typically much slower and has much higher latency than a non-mobile network. And, of course, any WAN is much slower than a LAN.
This means that a native mobile client uses a network that has very difference performance characteristics than a LAN used by a server-side web application. The server-side web application can make multiple requests to backend services without impacting the user experience where as a mobile client can only make a few. 
 The number of service instances and their locations (host+port) changes dynamically 
 Partitioning into services can change over time and should be hidden from clients 
 Services might use a diverse set of protocols, some of which might not be web friendly 
 Solution 
 Implement an API gateway that is the single entry point for all clients.
The API gateway handles requests in one of two ways.
Some requests are simply proxied/routed to the appropriate service.
It handles other requests by fanning out to multiple services. 
 Rather than provide a one-size-fits-all style API, the API gateway can expose a different API for each client. For example, the Netflix API gateway runs client-specific adapter code that provides each client with an API that’s best suited to its requirements. 
 The API gateway might also implement security, e.g. verify that the client is authorized to perform the request 
 Variation: Backends for frontends 
 A variation of this pattern is the Backends for frontends pattern.
It defines a separate API gateway for each kind of client. 
 In this example, there are three kinds of clients: web application, mobile application, and external 3rd party application.
There are three different API gateways.
Each one is provides an API for its client. 
 Examples 
 Netflix API gateway 
 A simple Java/Spring API gateway from the Money Transfer example application . 
 Resulting context 
 Using an API gateway has the following benefits: 
 Insulates the clients from how the application is partitioned into microservices 
 Insulates the clients from the problem of determining the locations of service instances 
 Provides the optimal API for each client 
 Reduces the number of requests/roundtrips. For example, the API gateway enables clients to retrieve data from multiple services with a single round-trip. Fewer requests also means less overhead and improves the user experience. An API gateway is essential for mobile applications. 
 Simplifies the client by moving logic for calling multiple services from the client to API gateway 
 Translates from a “standard” public web-friendly API protocol to whatever protocols are used internally 
 The API gateway pattern has some drawbacks: 
 Increased complexity - the API gateway is yet another moving part that must be developed, deployed and managed 
 Increased response time due to the additional network hop through the API gateway - however, for most applications the cost of an extra roundtrip is insignificant. 
 Issues: 
 How implement the API gateway? An event-driven/reactive approach is best if it must scale to scale to handle high loads. On the JVM, NIO-based libraries such as Netty, Spring Reactor, etc. make sense. NodeJS is another option. 
 Related patterns 
 The Microservice architecture pattern creates the need for this pattern. 
 The API gateway must use either the Client-side Discovery pattern or Server-side Discovery pattern to route requests to available service instances. 
 The API Gateway may authenticate the user and pass an Access Token containing information about the user to the services 
 An API Gateway will use a Circuit Breaker to invoke services 
 An API gateway often implements the API Composition pattern 
 Known uses 
 Netflix API gateway 
 Example application 
 See the API Gateway that part of my Microservices pattern’s example application .
It’s implemented using Spring Cloud Gateway. 
 pattern
 application api
 inter-service communication
 application architecture
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Topics 
 Note: tagging is work-in-process 
 Cynefin   · 
 DDD   · 
 GitOps   · 
 Microservices adoption   · 
 ancient lore   · 
 anti-patterns   · 
 api gateway   · 
 application api   · 
 application architecture   · 
 architecting   · 
 architecture   · 
 architecture documentation   · 
 assemblage   · 
 automation   · 
 beer   · 
 books   · 
 build vs buy   · 
 containers   · 
 context engineering   · 
 culture   · 
 dark energy and dark matter   · 
 decision making   · 
 deliberative design   · 
 deployability   · 
 deployment   · 
 deployment pipeline   · 
 design-time coupling   · 
 developer experience   · 
 development   · 
 devops   · 
 docker   · 
 eventuate platform   · 
 evolvability   · 
 experimentation   · 
 fast flow   · 
 genAI development   · 
 generative AI   · 
 glossary   · 
 harness engineering   · 
 health   · 
 hexagonal architecture   · 
 idea to code   · 
 implementing commands   · 
 implementing queries   · 
 infrastructure as code   · 
 inter-service communication   · 
 kubernetes   · 
 loose coupling   · 
 manning publications   · 
 microservice   · 
 microservice architecture   · 
 microservice chassis   · 
 microservices adoption   · 
 microservices platforms   · 
 microservices rules   · 
 microservicesio updates   · 
 modifiability   · 
 modular monolith   · 
 multi-architecture docker images   · 
 observability   · 
 pattern   · 
 pattern language   · 
 patterns   · 
 platform strategy   · 
 refactoring   · 
 refactoring to microservices   · 
 resilience   · 
 runtime coupling   · 
 sagas   · 
 scripting   · 
 security   · 
 service api   · 
 service architecture   · 
 service blueprint   · 
 service collaboration   · 
 service design   · 
 service discovery   · 
 service granularity   · 
 service template   · 
 socio-technical architecture   · 
 software delivery metrics   · 
 success triangle   · 
 survey   · 
 tacos   · 
 team topologies   · 
 technical debt   · 
 testability   · 
 testing   · 
 transaction management   · 
 transactional messaging   · 
 uncertainty   · 
 wardley mapping 
 All content 
 The patterns 
 How to apply the patterns 
 Application architecture patterns 
 Monolithic architecture 
 Microservice architecture 
 Decomposition 
 Decompose by business capability 
 Decompose by subdomain 
 Self-contained Service new 
 Service per team new 
 Refactoring to microservices new 
 Strangler Application 
 Anti-corruption layer 
 Data management 
 Database per Service 
 Shared database 
 Saga 
 Command-side replica 
 API Composition 
 CQRS 
 Domain event 
 Event sourcing 
 Transactional messaging 
 Transactional outbox 
 Transaction log tailing 
 Polling publisher 
 Testing 
 Service Component Test 
 Consumer-driven contract test 
 Consumer-side contract test 
 Deployment patterns 
 Multiple service instances per host 
 Service instance per host 
 Service instance per VM 
 Service instance per Container 
 Serverless deployment 
 Service deployment platform 
 Cross cutting concerns 
 Microservice chassis 
 Service Template 
 Externalized configuration 
 Communication style 
 Remote Procedure Invocation 
 Messaging 
 Domain-specific protocol 
 Idempotent Consumer 
 External API 
 API gateway 
 Backend for front-end 
 Service discovery 
 Client-side discovery 
 Server-side discovery 
 Service registry 
 Self registration 
 3rd party registration 
 Reliability 
 Circuit Breaker 
 Security 
 Access Token 
 Observability 
 Log aggregation 
 Application metrics 
 Audit logging 
 Distributed tracing 
 Exception tracking 
 Health check API 
 Log deployments and changes 
 UI patterns 
 Server-side page fragment composition 
 Client-side UI composition 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
