# Backends for frontends

Source: Microservice Patterns (Manning 2018), book p.265 (API gateway chapter)

The solution is to have an API gateway for each client, the so-called Backends for
frontends (BFF) pattern, which was pioneered by Phil Calcado and his colleagues at
SoundCloud. Each API module becomes its own standalone API gateway that's developed
and operated by a single client team.

Pattern: Backends for frontends
Implement a separate API gateway for each type of client. See
http://microservices.io/patterns/apigateway.html.

A client team owns their API module. As they change the client, they can change the
API module and not ask the API gateway team to make the changes.

The public API team owns and operates their API gateway, the mobile team owns and
operates theirs, and so on. In theory, different API gateways could be developed using
different technology stacks. But that risks duplicating code for common functionality,
such as the code that implements edge functions. Ideally, all API gateways use the same
technology stack. The common functionality is a shared library implemented by the API
gateway team.

Besides clearly defining responsibilities, the BFF pattern has other benefits. The API
modules are isolated from one another, which improves reliability. One misbehaving API
can't easily impact other APIs. It also improves observability, because different API
modules are different processes. Another benefit of the BFF pattern is that each API is
independently scalable. The BFF pattern also reduces startup time because each API
gateway is a smaller, simpler application.

Drawbacks (shared with API gateway): it is yet another highly available component that
must be developed, deployed, and managed. There's also a risk that the API gateway
becomes a development bottleneck. It's important that the process for updating the API
gateway be as lightweight as possible. Otherwise, developers will be forced to wait in
line to update the gateway.

Netflix example: the Netflix streaming service is available on hundreds of device types.
Initially Netflix attempted a one-size-fits-all API, but that didn't work well because of
the diverse devices and their needs. Today Netflix uses an API gateway implementing a
separate API for each device; the client device team develops and owns the API
implementation. Netflix is moving to an architecture similar to BFF: client teams write
API modules using NodeJS, each API module runs its own Docker container, and the
scripts invoke a second API gateway that exposes service APIs via Netflix Falcor
(declarative, dynamic API composition).
