# Microservice chassis

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/microservice-chassis.html

Pattern: Microservice chassis 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Microservice chassis 
 pattern
 service design
 microservice chassis
 Context 
 Want to learn more about this pattern? 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 When you start the development of an application you often spend a significant amount of time writing the build logic and putting in place the mechanisms to handle cross-cutting concerns.
The build logic builds, and tests the application and also packages into a production-ready format, such as a Docker container image.
For example, the majority of the build logic for a Java application is implemented using Gradle or Maven.
It might also consist of configuration scripts for build automation tool, such as CircleCI or Github Actions.
On the surface, the build logic appears to be quite simple.
However, even defining a carefully curated set of dependencies can be remarkably challenging. 
 In addition to the build logic, you need to handle cross cutting concerns.
Examples of cross-cutting concerns include: 
 Security - for example, REST APIs must be secured by requiring an Access Token 
 Externalized configuration - includes credentials, and network locations of external services such as databases and message brokers 
 Logging - configuring of a logging framework such as log4j or logback 
 Health check - a url that a monitoring service can “ping” to determine the health of the application 
 Metrics - measurements that provide insight into what the application is doing and how it is performing 
 Distributed tracing - instrument services with code that assigns each external request an unique identifier that is passed between services. 
 As well as these generic cross-cutting concerns, there are also cross-cutting concerns that are specific to the technologies that an application uses.
Applications that use infrastructure services such as databases or a message brokers require boilerplate configuration in order to do that.
For example, applications that use a relational database must be configured with a connection pool.
Web applications that process HTTP requests also need boilerplate configuration. 
 It is common to spend one or two days, sometimes even longer, writing the build logic and implementing cross-cutting concerns.
If you going to spend months or years developing a monolithic application then the upfront investment is insignificant.
The situation is very different, however, if you are developing an application that has the microservice architecture .
There are tens or hundreds of services.
You will frequently create new services, each of which will only take days or weeks to develop.
You cannot afford to spend a few days setting up every service.
What is even worse is that in a microservice architecture there are additional cross-cutting concerns that you have to deal with including service registration and discovery, and circuit breakers for reliably handling partial failure. 
 One solution is to create a Service Template , which is a source code template that a developer can copy in order to quickly start developing a new service.
The drawback, however, of a Service Template is that it’s a form of copy/paste programming: when the build logic and cross-cutting concerns logic needs to change, each service must be updated individually. 
 Problem 
 How can a team quickly create and setup a maintainable code base for a production-ready service so they can start developing its business logic? 
 Forces 
 A service must implement
 Build logic that builds, and tests the application and also packages into a production-ready format, such as a Docker container image. 
 Cross-cutting concerns such as externalized configuration, logging, health checks, metrics, service registration and discovery, circuit breakers. There are also cross-cutting concerns that are specific to the technologies that the microservices uses. 
 Creating a new microservice should be fast and easy 
 It should be fast and straightforward to update existing services when the requirements for build logic and cross-cutting concerns change. 
 Create a microservice chassis framework that can be foundation for developing your microservices.
The chassis implements 
 Reusable build logic that builds, and tests a service. This includes, for example, Gradle Plugins. 
 Mechanisms that handle cross-cutting concerns. The chassis typically assembles and configures a collection of frameworks and libraries that implement this functionality. 
 The Service Template is a sample service that uses the microservice chassis. 
 Examples of frameworks that are the starting point for creating a microservice chassis: 
 Java
 Spring Boot and Spring Cloud 
 Dropwizard 
 Go
 Gizmo 
 Micro 
 Go kit 
 Resulting context 
 The main benefit of a microservice chassis is that it’s faster and easier to keep the dependencies, build logic and cross-cutting concern logic up to date.
You simply release a new version of the microservice chassis framework that contains the needed changes, and update each service to the use new version. 
 One issue is that you need a microservice chassis for each programming language/framework that you want to use.
This can be an obstacle to adopting a new programming language or framework. 
 There are the following related patterns: 
 Service Template - a template for a service that developers can copy to create a new application. It’s either an alternative to the Microservice Chassis pattern; or it uses a Microservice Chassis and simply contains the code and configuration that doesn’t belong in the chassis 
 Microservices - this pattern motivates the need for the Microservice Chassis pattern 
 Self Registration - the microservice chassis is often responsible for registering the service with the service registry 
 Client-side discovery - the microservice chassis is often responsible for client-side service discovery 
 Circuit Breaker - the microservice chassis framework might implement this pattern 
 Distributed tracing - the microservice chassis framework might instrument the code 
 Service Template often uses a Microservice Chassis 
 See also 
 This excellent Service Template blog post by @ph1 
 Learn more 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis. 
 pattern
 service design
 microservice chassis
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
