# Distributed tracing

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/observability/distributed-tracing.html

Pattern: Distributed tracing 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Distributed tracing 
 pattern
 observability
 service design
 Context 
 You have applied the Microservice architecture pattern .
Requests often span multiple services.
Each service handles a request by performing one or more operations, e.g. database queries, publishes messages, etc. 
 Problem 
 How to understand the behavior of an application and troubleshoot problems? 
 Forces 
 External monitoring only tells you the overall response time and number of invocations - no insight into the individual operations 
 Any solution should have minimal runtime overhead 
 Log entries for a request are scattered across numerous logs 
 Solution 
 Instrument services with code that 
 Assigns each external request a unique external request id 
 Passes the external request id to all services that are involved in handling the request 
 Includes the external request id in all log messages 
 Records information (e.g. start time, end time) about the requests and operations performed when handling a external request in a centralized service 
 This instrumentation might be part of the functionality provided by a Microservice Chassis framework . 
 Examples 
 The Microservices Example application is an example of an application that uses client-side service discovery.
It is written in Scala and uses Spring Boot and Spring Cloud as the Microservice chassis .
They provide various capabilities including Spring Cloud Sleuth , which provides support for distributed tracing.
It instruments Spring components to gather trace information and can delivers it to a Zipkin Server, which gathers and displays traces. 
 The following Spring Cloud Sleuth dependencies are configured in build.gradle : 
 dependencies { 
 compile "org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-sleuth-stream" 
 compile "org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-starter-sleuth" 
 compile "org.springframework.cloud:spring-cloud-stream-binder-rabbit" 
 RabbitMQ is used to deliver traces to Zipkin. 
 The services are deployed with various Spring Cloud Sleuth-related environment variables set in the docker-compose.yml : 
 environment:
 SPRING_RABBITMQ_HOST: rabbitmq
 SPRING_SLEUTH_ENABLED: "true"
 SPRING_SLEUTH_SAMPLER_PERCENTAGE: 1
 SPRING_SLEUTH_WEB_SKIPPATTERN: "/api-docs.*|/autoconfig|/configprops|/dump|/health|/info|/metrics.*|/mappings|/trace|/swagger.*|.*\\.png|.*\\.css|.*\\.js|/favicon.ico|/hystrix.stream"
 This properties enable Spring Cloud Sleuth and configure it to sample all requests.
It also tells Spring Cloud Sleuth to deliver traces to Zipkin via RabbitMQ running on the host called rabbitmq . 
 The Zipkin server is a simple, Spring Boot application: 
 @SpringBootApplication 
 @EnableZipkinStreamServer 
 public class ZipkinServer { 
 public static void main ( String [] args ) { 
 SpringApplication . run ( ZipkinServer . class , args ); 
 } 
 } 
 It is deployed using Docker: 
 zipkin : 
 image : java:openjdk-8u91-jdk 
 working_dir : /app 
 volumes : 
 - ./zipkin-server/build/libs:/app 
 command : java -jar /app/zipkin-server.jar --server.port=9411 
 links : 
 - rabbitmq 
 ports : 
 - " 9411:9411" 
 environment : 
 RABBIT_HOST : rabbitmq 
 Resulting Context 
 This pattern has the following benefits: 
 It provides useful insight into the behavior of the system including the sources of latency 
 It enables developers to see how an individual request is handled by searching across aggregated logs for its external request id 
 This pattern has the following issues: 
 Aggregating and storing traces can require significant infrastructure 
 Related patterns 
 Log aggregation - the external request id is included in each log message 
 See also 
 Open Zipkin - service for recording and displaying tracing information 
 Open Tracing - standardized API for distributed tracing 
 pattern
 observability
 service design
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
