# Health check API

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/observability/health-check-api.html

Pattern: Health Check API 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Health Check API 
 pattern
 observability
 service design
 Context 
 You have applied the Microservice architecture pattern .
Sometimes a service instance can be incapable of handling requests yet still be running.
For example, it might have ran out of database connections.
When this occurs, the monitoring system should generate a alert.
Also, the load balancer or service registry should not route requests to the failed service instance. 
 Problem 
 How to detect that a running service instance is unable to handle requests? 
 Forces 
 An alert should be generated when a service instance fails 
 Requests should be routed to working service instances 
 Solution 
 A service has an health check API endpoint (e.g. HTTP /health ) that returns the health of the service.
The API endpoint handler performs various checks, such as 
 the status of the connections to the infrastructure services used by the service instance 
 the status of the host, e.g. disk space 
 application specific logic 
 A health check client - a monitoring service, service registry or load balancer - periodically invokes the endpoint to check the health of the service instance. 
 Examples 
 The Microservices Example application is an example on an application implements a health check API.
It is written in Scala and uses Spring Boot and Spring Cloud as the Microservice chassis .
They provide various capabilities including a health check endpoint.
The endpoint is implemented by the Spring Boot Actuator module.
It configures a /health HTTP endpoint that invokes extensible health check logic. 
 To enable a /health endpoint, first define actuator as a dependency: 
 dependencies { 
 compile "org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-actuator" 
 Second, enable Spring Boot autoconfiguration: 
 @SpringBootApplication 
 class UserRegistrationConfiguration { 
 At this point, your application will have a health check endpoint with default behavior. 
 You can customize this behavior by defining one or more Spring beans that implement the HealthIndicator interface: 
 class UserRegistrationConfiguration { 
 @Bean 
 def discoveryHealthIndicator ( discoveryClient : EurekaClient ) : HealthIndicator = new DiscoveryHealthIndicator ( discoveryClient ) 
 A HealthIndicator must implement a health() method, which returns a Health value. 
 Resulting Context 
 This pattern has the following benefits: 
 The health check endpoint enables the health of a service instance to be periodically tested 
 This pattern has the following drawbacks: 
 The health check might not sufficiently comprehensive or the service instance might fail between health checks and so requests might still be routed to a failed service instance 
 Related patterns 
 Service registry - the service registry invokes the health check endpoint 
 pattern
 observability
 service design
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
