# Deploy a service as a container

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/deployment/service-per-container.html

Pattern: Service instance per container 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Service instance per container 
 pattern
 deployment
 docker
 Context 
 You have applied the Microservice architecture pattern and architected your system as a set of services.
Each service is deployed as a set of service instances for throughput and availability. 
 Problem 
 How are services packaged and deployed? 
 Forces 
 Services are written using a variety of languages, frameworks, and framework versions 
 Each service consists of multiple service instances for throughput and availability 
 Service must be independently deployable and scalable 
 Service instances need to be isolated from one another 
 You need to be able to quickly build and deploy a service 
 You need to be able to constrain the resources (CPU and memory) consumed by a service 
 You need to monitor the behavior of each service instance 
 You want deployment to reliable 
 You must deploy the application as cost-effectively as possible 
 Solution 
 Package the service as a (Docker) container image and deploy each service instance as a container 
 Examples 
 Docker is becoming an extremely popular way of packaging and deploying services.
Each service is packaged as a Docker image and each service instance is a Docker container.
There are several Docker clustering frameworks including: 
 Kubernetes 
 Marathon/Mesos 
 Amazon EC2 Container Service 
 Resulting context 
 The benefits of this approach include: 
 It is straightforward to scale up and down a service by changing the number of container instances. 
 The container encapsulates the details of the technology used to build the service. All services are, for example, started and stopped in exactly the same way. 
 Each service instance is isolated 
 A container imposes limits on the CPU and memory consumed by a service instance 
 Containers are extremely fast to build and start.
For example, it’s 100x faster to package an application as a Docker container than it is to package it as an AMI.
Docker containers also start much faster than a VM since only the application process starts rather than an entire OS. 
 The drawbacks of this approach include: 
 The infrastructure for deploying containers is not as rich as the infrastructure for deploying virtual machines. 
 Related patterns 
 This pattern is a refinement of the Service Instance per Host pattern 
 The Service Instance per VM pattern is an alternative solution 
 The Serverless deployment pattern is an alternative solution. 
 pattern
 deployment
 docker
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
