# Language-specific packaging format

Source: Microservice Patterns (Manning 2018), book p.387

386
CHAPTER 12
Deploying microservices
pipeline to deploy new versions of services, and users to access functionality imple-
mented by those services.
 A production environment must implement four key capabilities:
Service management interface—Enables developers to create, update, and config-
ure services. Ideally, this interface is a REST API invoked by command-line and
GUI deployment tools.
Runtime service management—Attempts to ensure that the desired number of ser-
vice instances is running at all times. If a service instance crashes or is somehow
unable to handle requests, the production environment must restart it. If a
machine crashes, the production environment must restart those service instances
on a different machine.
Monitoring—Provides developers with insight into what their services are doing,
including log files and metrics. If there are problems, the production environ-
ment must alert the developers. Chapter 11 describes monitoring, also called
observability.
Request routing—Routes requests from users to the services.
In this chapter I discuss the four main deployment options:
Deploying services as language-specific packages, such as Java JAR or WAR files.
It’s worthwhile exploring this option, because even though I recommend using
one of the other options, its drawbacks motivate the other options.
Deploying services as virtual machines, which simplifies deployment by packag-
ing a service as a virtual machine image that encapsulate the service’s technol-
ogy stack.
Deploying services as containers, which are more lightweight than virtual
machines. I show how to deploy the FTGO application’s Restaurant Service
using Kubernetes, a popular Docker orchestration framework.
Deploying services using serverless deployment, which is even more modern than
containers. We’ll look at how to deploy Restaurant Service using AWS Lambda,
a popular serverless platform.
Let’s first look at how to deploy services as language-specific packages.
12.1
Deploying services using the Language-specific 
packaging format pattern
Let’s imagine that you want to deploy the FTGO application’s Restaurant Service,
which is a Spring Boot-based Java application. One way to deploy this service is by
using the Service as a language-specific package pattern. When using this pattern,
what’s deployed in production and what’s managed by the service runtime is a service
in its language-specific package. In the case of Restaurant Service, that’s either the
executable JAR file or a WAR file. For other languages, such as NodeJS, a service is a
directory of source code and modules. For some languages, such as GoLang, a service
is an operating system-specific executable.
 


387
Deploying services using the Language-specific packaging format pattern
To deploy Restaurant Service on a machine, you would first install the necessary
runtime, which in this case is the JDK. If it’s a WAR file, you also need to install a
web container such as Apache Tomcat. Once you’ve configured the machine, you
copy the package to the machine and start the service. Each service instance runs as
a JVM process.
 Ideally, you’ve set up your deployment pipeline to automatically deploy the service
to production, as shown in figure 12.3. The deployment pipeline builds an executable
JAR file or WAR file. It then invokes the production environment’s service manage-
ment interface to deploy the new version.
A service instance is typically a single process but sometimes may be a group of pro-
cesses. A Java service instance, for example, is a process running the JVM. A NodeJS
service might spawn multiple worker processes in order to process requests concur-
rently. Some languages support deploying multiple service instances within the same
process.
 Sometimes you might deploy a single service instance on a machine, while retain-
ing the option to deploy multiple service instances on the same machine. For exam-
ple, as figure 12.4 shows, you could run multiple JVMs on a single machine. Each JVM
runs a single service instance.
Pattern: Language-specific packaging format
Deploy a language-specific package into production. See http://microservices.io/
patterns/deployment/language-specific-packaging.html.
JVM
process
JVM
process
JVM
process
Service instance
Build time
Runtime
Service runtime management
Machine
Production
JDK/JRE
Machine
JDK/JRE
Service
code
Executable
JAR/WAR ﬁle
Deployment
pipeline
Figure 12.3
The deployment pipeline builds an executable JAR file and deploys it into production. 
In production, each service instance is a JVM running on a machine that has the JDK or JRE installed.
