# Serverless deployment

Source: https://microservices.io/patterns/deployment/serverless-deployment.html

Pattern: Serverless deployment 
 Microservice Architecture 
 Patterns 
 Articles 
 Presentations 
 Adopt 
 Refactoring 
 Testing 
 Modernization Help 
 About 
 Pattern: Serverless deployment 
 pattern
 deployment
 Context 
 You have applied the Microservice architecture pattern and architected your system as a set of services.
Each service is deployed as a set of service instances for throughput and availability. 
 Problem 
 How are services packaged and deployed? 
 Forces 
 Services are written using a variety of languages, frameworks, and framework versions 
 Each service consists of multiple service instances for throughput and availability 
 Service must be independently deployable and scalable 
 Service instances need to be isolated from one another 
 You need to be able to quickly build and deploy a service 
 You need to be able to constrain the resources (CPU and memory) consumed by a service 
 You need to monitor the behavior of each service instance 
 You want deployment to reliable 
 You must deploy the application as cost-effectively as possible 
 Solution 
 Use a deployment infrastructure that hides any concept of servers (i.e. reserved or preallocated resources)- physical or virtual hosts, or containers.
The infrastructure takes your service’s code and runs it.
You are charged for each request based on the resources consumed. 
 To deploy your service using this approach, you package the code (e.g. as a ZIP file), upload it to the deployment infrastructure and describe the desired performance characteristics. 
 The deployment infrastructure is a utility operated by a public cloud provider.
It typically uses either containers or virtual machines to isolate the services.
However, these details are hidden from you.
Neither you nor anyone else in your organization is responsible for managing any low-level infrastructure such as operating systems, virtual machines, etc. 
 Examples 
 There are a few different serverless deployment environments: 
 AWS Lambda 
 Google Cloud Functions 
 Azure Functions 
 They offer similar functionality but AWS Lambda has the richest feature set.
An AWS Lambda function is a stateless component that is invoked to handle events.
To create an AWS Lambda function you package your the NodeJS, Java or Python code for your service in a ZIP file, and upload it to AWS Lambda.
You also specify the name of function that handles events as well as resource limits. 
 When an event occurs, AWS Lambda finds an idle instance of your function, launching one if none are available and invokes the handler function.
AWS Lambda runs enough instances of your function to handle the load.
Under the covers, it uses containers to isolate each instance of a lambda function.
As you might expect, AWS Lambda runs the containers on EC2 instances. 
 There are four ways to invoke a lambda function.
One option is to configure your lambda function to be invoked in response to an event generated by an AWS service such as S3, DynamoDB or Kinesis.
Examples of events include the following: 
 an object being created in a S3 bucket 
 an item is created, updated or deleted in a DynamoDB table 
 a message is available to read from a Kinesis stream 
 an email being received via the Simple email service. 
 Another way to invoke a lambda function is to configure the AWS Lambda Gateway to route HTTP requests to your lambda.
AWS Gateway transforms an HTTP request into an event object, invokes the lambda function, and generates a HTTP response from the lambda function’s result. 
 You can also explicitly invoke your lambda function using the AWS Lambda Web Service API.
Your application that invokes the lambda function supplies a JSON object, which is passed to the lambda function.
The web service call returns the value returned by the lambda. 
 The fourth way to invoke a lambda function is periodically using a cron-like mechanism.
You can, for example, tell AWS to invoke you lambda function every five minutes. 
 The cost of each invocation is a function of the duration of the invocation, which is measured in 100 millisecond increments, and the memory consumed. 
 Resulting context 
 The benefits of using serverless deployment include: 
 It eliminates the need to spend time on the undifferentiated heavy lifting of managing low-level infrastructure.
Instead, you can focus on your code. 
 The serverless deployment infrastructure is extremely elastic.
It automatically scales your services to handle the load. 
 You pay for each request rather than provisioning what might be under utilized virtual machines or containers. 
 The drawbacks of serverless deployment include: 
 Significant limitation and constraints -
A serverless deployment environment typically has far more constraints that a VM-based or Container-based infrastructure.
For example, AWS Lambda only supports a few languages.
It is only suitable for deploying stateless applications that run in response to a request.
You cannot deploy a long running stateful application such as a database or message broker. 
 Limited “input sources” - lambdas can only respond to requests from a limited set of input sources.
AWS Lambda is not intended to run services that, for example, subscribe to a message broker such as RabbitMQ. 
 Applications must startup quickly - serverless deployment is not a good fit your service takes a long time to start 
 Risk of high latency - the time it takes for the infrastructure to provision an instance of your function and for the function to initialize might result in significant latency.
Moreover, a serverless deployment infrastructure can only react to increases in load.
You cannot proactively pre-provision capacity.
As a result, your application might initially exhibit high latency when there are sudden, massive spikes in load. 
 The deployment infrastructure will internally deploy your application using one of the other patterns.
It will most likely use Service Service per Host pattern . 
 Related patterns 
 The Multiple Service Instances per Host pattern is an alternative deployment solution 
 The Single Service per Host pattern is an alternative deployment solution 
 pattern
 deployment
 Modernization Help 
 Copyright © 2026 Chris Richardson • All rights reserved 
 About Microservices.io 
 Microservices.io is created by Chris Richardson , software architect, creator of the original CloudFoundry.com, and author of Microservices Patterns . Chris helps organizations modernize their architecture to enable fast flow and GenAI-powered software delivery.
 Need help modernizing your architecture? 
 Avoid the trap of creating a modern legacy system — a new architecture with the same old problems. 
 Contact me to discuss your modernization goals.
 Get Help 
 Microservices Patterns, 2nd edition 
 I am very excited to announce that the MEAP for the second edition of my book, Microservices Patterns is now available!
 Learn more 
 Latest articles 
 Writing better problem reports: 6 essential details 
-->
 ASK CHRIS 
 ? 
 Got a question about microservices? 
 Fill in this form . If I can, I'll write a blog post that answers your question. 
 NEED HELP? 
 I help organizations improve agility and competitiveness through better software architecture.
 Learn more about my consulting engagements , and training workshops .
 PREMIUM CONTENT 
 Premium content now available for paid subscribers at premium.microservices.io .
 MICROSERVICES WORKSHOPS 
 Chris teaches comprehensive workshops for architects and developers that will enable your organization use microservices effectively.
 Avoid the pitfalls of adopting microservices and learn essential topics, such as service decomposition and design and how to refactor a monolith to microservices.
 Learn more 
 Remote consulting session 
 Got a specific microservice architecture-related question? For example: 
 Wondering whether your organization should adopt microservices? 
 Want to know how to migrate your monolith to microservices? 
 Facing a tricky microservice architecture design problem? 
 Consider signing up for a two hour, highly focussed, consulting session. 
 ASSESS your architecture 
 Assess your application's microservice architecture and identify what needs to be improved. Engage Chris to conduct an architect review. 
 LEARN about microservices 
 Chris offers numerous other resources for learning the microservice architecture. 
 Get the book: Microservices Patterns 
 Read Chris Richardson's book:
 Example microservices applications 
 Want to see an example? Check out Chris Richardson's example applications.
 See code 
 Virtual bootcamp: Distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture 
 My virtual bootcamp, distributed data patterns in a microservice architecture, is now open for enrollment! 
 It covers the key distributed data management patterns including Saga, API Composition, and CQRS. 
 It consists of video lectures, code labs, and a weekly ask-me-anything video conference repeated in multiple timezones. 
 The regular price is $395/person but use coupon OFFEFKCW to sign up for $95 (valid until Sept 30th, 2025).
 There are deeper discounts for buying multiple seats.
 Learn more 
 Learn how to create a service template and microservice chassis 
 Take a look at my Manning LiveProject that teaches you how to develop a service template and microservice chassis.
 Signup for the newsletter For Email Marketing you can trust. 
 BUILD microservices 
 Ready to start using the microservice architecture?
 Consulting services 
 Engage Chris to create a microservices adoption roadmap and help you define your microservice architecture, 
 The Eventuate platform 
 Use the Eventuate.io platform to tackle distributed data management challenges in your microservices architecture. 
 Eventuate is Chris's latest startup. It makes it easy to use the Saga pattern to manage transactions and the CQRS pattern to implement queries. 
 Join the microservices google group 
 Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.
